“Their best one is like a brier,
“their most upright one
is worse than a thorn hedge.”
This is an example
of many agricultural metaphors
that Micah used in his writing.
But who was he talking about?
Why did he say this,
and what lesson
can we take away from today’s text?
To find the historical setting,
it’s helpful to look
at the “Table of the Books of the Bible”
that appears on page 1662
of the printed edition
of our New World Translation.
But if you’re using the JW Library app,
this is what you need to do.
Please follow along.
First, go to your home page for the Bible.
In the menu bar at the top,
you’ll see the word Introduction on the left.
At the bottom of the list that comes up,
you’ll see “Names and Order of the Books.”
Tap that.
And don’t be put off by the fact
that you’re only seeing
the names in order of the books.
Rather, scroll all the way
down to the bottom,
and there you will see
“Table of the Books of the Bible.”
Tap that.
You can bookmark it if you’d like
to get there faster the next time.
And then scroll down to Micah.
What do we learn
about the context of our day’s text?
It was written by Micah; we knew that.
Where was he?
In Judah.
When did he write this prophecy?
Sometime before the year 717 B.C.E.
And what time period does his writing cover?
The 60 years spanning from 777—717 B.C.E.
counting backwards toward the time of Jesus.
Now what was happening
during those 60 years?
We have a chart
in Appendix A6 that helps us.
Again,
if you’re following along in JW Library,
go to the upper left-hand corner
of your screen
and tap the menu bar,
“Names and Order”;
that is to say,
go back.
There you’ll see toward the bottom
of the list Appendix A.
Or you can always go back to the home page
and select Appendix A from the menu ribbon.
In any event, when you get to Appendix A,
you’ll see the option
for “A6 Chart:
Prophets and Kings
of Judah and of Israel.”
And remember,
we’re looking for what life was like
during the 60 years
between 777 and 717 B.C.E.
So likely, Part 2 would reveal
what we’re looking for.
Tap Part 2.
There we find this beautiful chart.
What does it tell us?
That Micah was a contemporary
of Isaiah and Hosea
and that his service as a prophet in Judah
ran during the reigns of Jotham for 16 years,
wicked King Ahaz for 16 years,
but also most of Hezekiah’s 29-year reign.
Meanwhile, what was happening
up in the northern ten-tribe kingdom?
Look at the chart again on the right
starting in 777 B.C.E.
Nineteen years are left of Pekah’s reign,
and then nine years of Hoshea’s rule,
but here things began to destabilize.
We see the Assyrian monarchy moving in
exerting its influence in Israel’s affairs.
And then, in 740 B.C.E.,
it’s all over
for the northern ten-tribe kingdom.
Did those events
have an influence on the south?
Certainly, it fed the Assyrians’ pride,
fueling their belief that they could come in
and overtake Judah in the same fashion.
And what do we know
about Jotham,
Ahaz, and Hezekiah?
Well, it was during Jotham’s reign
that Judah began to experience
military pressure
from an alliance between King Pekah
and King Rezin of Syria,
and that alliance would eventually
weaken Judah’s defenses
and leave them open to brutal attacks
by the Edomites in the southeast
and the Philistines coming from the west.
However, none of that humbled
wicked King Ahaz.
He led a debauched life,
he sought refuge with pagan rulers,
he adopted their way of worship,
and he even sacrificed his own sons
in the fire in the Valley of Hinnom.
No wonder Micah wrote what he did
in the words of today’s text.
Let’s go back and read it now
from Micah 7:2-4:
“The loyal one has perished from the earth;
“among men there is no one upright.
“All of them lie in ambush for bloodshed.
“Each hunts his own brother with a dragnet.
“Their hands are expert at doing what is bad;
“the prince is making demands,
“the judge asks for a reward,
“the prominent one makes known his desires,
“and they work it out together.
“Their best one is like thorns,
“their most upright one
is worse than a thorn hedge.”
So, what’s the meaning of the metaphor?
The topic: the unfaithful Israelites.
The image:
a patch of briers and thorns.
The point of similarity:
just as getting stuck in briers,
or a thorn hedge,
injures anyone who walks into it,
these corrupt Israelites harmed
anyone with whom they had dealings.
Now, how far did the corruption go?
Back in verse 2,
it said it was all-pervasive.
There was no one,
not even one who was upright.
Verse 3 indicated it reached
the highest levels of society.
The prominent expressed their wishes,
the judges accepted bribes
to carry out those wishes,
and they all were in cahoots.
They worked it out together.
Now verse 3 says this included the prince.
Who would have been the prince
in the days of King Ahaz?
Hezekiah?
Might Micah have written those words
during the actual reign of Hezekiah?
If so, how would Hezekiah respond?
Wasn’t he a good king?
Wouldn’t he say:
“Now wait a minute, Prophet.
You’ve got it all wrong”?
Would he get offended?
Would he imprison Micah for sedition?
We gain a fascinating insight
from a conversation
that took place a century or so later
recorded by Jeremiah in chapter 26.
Notice what it says in Jeremiah 26:18, 19:
“Micah of Moresheth was prophesying
“in the days of King Hezekiah of Judah,
“and he said to all the people of Judah,
‘This is what Jehovah of armies says,’”
quoting Micah 3:12;
verse 19:
“Did King Hezekiah of Judah
and all Judah then put him to death?
“Did he not fear Jehovah
and beg for Jehovah’s favor,
“so that Jehovah changed his mind
concerning the calamity
that he had spoken against them?”
Hezekiah repented
at what Micah preached
—fascinating insight.
Did Micah stir in young Hezekiah
a desire to be a better student of God’s law?
Did Hezekiah, as a prince,
then write the 119th Psalm
with its famous concluding words:
“I have strayed like a lost sheep.
“Search for your servant,
for I have not forgotten
your commandments”?
Although we can’t say for certain,
it’s all within the realm of possibility.
And what we do know is that Hezekiah
took Micah’s counsel to heart
because Micah was patient;
Micah stuck with his assignment.
Even though Micah wrote
the words of today’s text,
he refused to give up hope
in Jehovah’s ability
to bring about changes
in people’s hearts and people’s thinking.
Micah’s patience paid off.
He waited on Jehovah.
He saw wonderful results
right in his own lifetime.
And you too are acting loyally
in a very disloyal world.
What will be the effect
of your patient endurance
on others today?